# count_reads.py

This script count reads from a .sam file and sum up within each genes and intergenic regions based on the 5' position of reads.
Preparation: an annotation file with gff/gtf format, a sam format file generated by bowtie/bowtie2 or other tools with same function.

Before running this script, ensure the format of gff/gtf file:
    1. there is no header line in the table;
    2. the term in the 3rd column specifying cds is 'CDS';
    3. the 4th and 5th columns are the start and end position of the cds.

Then, rectify some parts in the main function(lines under "def main():")
    1. "gtf_file" is the path of your gff/gtf file
    2. "chr_search_term" is a character specifying the chromosomes in the .sam file,
    usually the same as the term in the first column of tff/gtf file;
    3. "genome_length" is the length of your genome;
    4. "col_des" is the 0-based index of the column describing cds, 8 means the 9th column;
    5. "cds_search_term" is a format of your descriptions of cds,
        eg: r'ID=(.+?);'            for ID=cds000005;Parent=GE000005
            r'gene_id "(.+?)"'      for gene_id "ETAE_0001"

Finally, move all the .sam file you want to count and this script in a same directory,
    type "python count_reads.py" or run this script in an IDE such as Pycharm or Spyder.

__Dependency__: pandas.

v1.1 2023.2.21



# SAMreader.py

This is a software that can be used to analyze .SAM file.
This method is based on SAMreader_Tn5.m implemented by MatLab in this article:
    Pritchard, J. R., Chao, M. C., Abel, S., Davis, B. M., Baranowski, C., Zhang, Y. J., Rubin, E. J., & Waldor, M. K. (2014). ARTIST: high-resolution genome-wide assessment of fitness using transposon-insertion sequencing. PLoS genetics, 10(11), e1004782. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004782

This method is implemented by Python and can replace the original one owing to its efficiency (more than 100 times)
The result is a file with .wig2 extension, each line represent the sum of insertions of all sites in the window.
The .wig2 file can be loaded in MatLab as All_Tn5_sum variable to perform further HMM analysis.

Usage:
    Open this script, rectify some parts in the main function(lines under "def main()")
    1. "chr_identifier" is a character specifying the chromosomes in the .sam file,
    usually the same as the term in the first column of tff/gtf file;
    2. "genome_length" is the length of your genome;
    3. "window_size" is the size of window you want to sum reads;
    Finally, move all the .sam file you want to count and this script in a same directory,
        type "python SAMreader.py" or run this script in an IDE such as Pycharm or Spyder.

v1.0 2023.2.09
v1.1 2023.2.21 (byf)
    Modify some part of the manual.